La plus commune façon d'amollir les cœurs de ceux qu'on a offencez , lors qu'ayans la vengeance en main , ils nous tiennent à leur mercy , c'est de les esmouuoir par submission , à commiseration et à pitié : toutesfois la brauerie , la constance , et la resolution , moyens tous contraires , ont quelquesfois seruy à ce mesme effect .   ||| THE most usuall way to appease those minds we have offended , when revenge lies in their hands , and that we stand at their mercy ,  is , by submission to move them to commiseration and pitty : Neverthelesse , courage , constancie , and resolution , meanes altogether opposite , have sometimes wrought the same effect .
Edouard Prince de Galles , celuy qui regenta si long temps nostre Guienne : personnage duquel les conditions et la fortune ont beaucoup de notables parties de grandeur ; ayant esté bien fort offencé par les Limosins , et prenant leur ville par force , ne peut estre arresté par les cris du peuple , et des femmes , et enfans abandonnez à la boucherie , luy criants mercy , et se iettans à ses pieds : iusqu'à ce que passant tousiours outre dans la ville , il apperçeut trois Gentilshommes François , qui d'vne hardiesse incroyable soustenoient seuls l'effort de son armee victorieuse .   ||| Edward the black Prince of Wales , who so long governed our Country of Guienne , a man whose conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable parts of worth and magnanimitie , having beene grievously offended by the Limosins , though he by maine force tooke and entered their Citie , could by no meanes be appeased , nor by the wailefull out-cries of all sorts of people , as Of men , women , and children , be moved to any pitty , they prostrating themselves to the common slaughter , crying for mercy , and humbly submitting themselves at his feet , untill such time as in triumphant manner passing thorow their Citie , he perceived three French Gentlemen , who alone , with an incredible and undaunted boldnesse , gainstood the enraged violence , and made head against the furie of his victorious armie .
La consideration et le respect d'vne si notable vertu , reboucha premierement la pointe de sa cholere : et commença par ces trois , à faire misericorde à tous les autres habitans de la ville .   ||| The consideration and respect of so notable a vertue, did first abate the dint of his wrath , and from those three began to relent , and shew mercy to all the other inhabitants of the said towne .
L'Empereur Conrad troisiesme , ayant assiegé Guelphe Duc de Bauieres , ne voulut condescendre à plus douces conditions , quelques viles et lasches satisfactions qu'on luy offrist, que de permettre seulement aux gentils-femmes qui estoient assiegees auec le Duc , de sortir leur honneur sauue , à pied , auec ce qu'elles pourroient emporter sur elles .   ||| The Emperour Conradus , third of that name , having besieged Guelphe , Duke of Bavaria , what vile or baise satisfaction soever was offered him , would yeeld to no other milder conditions , but only to suffer such Grentlewomen as were with the Duke in the Citie , their honours safe , to issue out of the Towne afoot , with such things as they could carry about them .
Elles d'vn cœur magnanime, s'aduiserent de charger sur leurs espaules leurs maris, leurs enfans, et le Duc mesme.   ||| They with an unrelenting courage advised and resolved themselves to carry their husbands , their children , and the Duke himselfe , on their backs .
L'Empereur print si grand plaisir à voir la gentillesse de leur courage , qu'il en pleura d'aise, et amortit toute cette aigreur d'inimitié mortelle et capitale qu'il auoit portee contre ce Duc : et dés lors en auant traita humainement luy et les siens .   ||| The Emperour perceiving the quaintnesse of their device , tooke so great pleasure at it , that hee wept for joy, and forthwith converted that former inexorable rage , and mortall hatred he bare the Duke, into so milde a relenting and gentle kindnesse , that thence forward he entreated both him and his with all favour and courtesie .
L'vn et l'autre de ces deux moyens m'emporteroit aysement : car i'ay vne merueilleuse lascheté vers la misericorde et mansuetude .   ||| Either of these wayes might easily perswade mee : for I am much inclined to mercie, and anected to mildnesse .
tant y a , qu'à mon aduis , ie serois pour me rendre plus naturellement à la compassion , qu'à l'estimation .   ||| So it i s, that in mine opinion, I should more naturally stoope unto compassion , than bend to estimation .
Si est la pitié passion vitieuse aux Stoiques .   ||| Yet is pitty held a vicious passion among the Stoicks .
ils veulent qu'on secoure les affligez , mais non pas qu'on flechisse et compatisse auec eux .   ||| They would have us aid the afflicted , but not to faint , and co-sufier with them .
Or ces exemples me semblent plus à propos , d'autant qu'on voit ces ames assaillies et essayees par ces deux moyens, en soustenir l'vn sans s'esbranler , et courber sous l'autre .   ||| These examples seeme fittest for mee , forsomuch as these minds are scene to be assaulted and environed by these two meanes , in undauntedly sufiering the one , and stooping under the other .
Il se peut dire , que de rompre son cœur à la commiseration , c'est l'effet de la facilité ,debonnaireté , et mollesse : d'où il aduient que les natures plus foibles , comme celles des femmes , des enfans , et du vulgaire , y sont plus subiettes .   ||| It may peradventure be said , that to yeeld ones heart unto commiseration , is an effect of facility , tendemesse , and meeknesse : whence it proceedeth , that the weakest natures , as of women , children , and the vulgar sort are more subject unto it .
mais ayant eu à desdaing les larmes et les pleurs , de se rendre à la seule reuerence de la saincte image de la vertu , que c'est l'effect d'vne ame forte et imployable , ayant en affection et en honneur vne vigueur masle , et obstinee .   ||| But having contemned teares and wailings to yeeld unto the onely reverence of the sacred Image of vertue, is the effect of a couragious and imployable minde , holding a masculine and constant vigour , in honeur and affection .
Toutesfois és ames moins genereuses, l'estonnement et l'admiration peuuent faire naistre vn pareil effect .   ||| Notwithstanding, amazement and admiration may in lesse generous minds worke the like effect .
tesmoin le peuple Thebain, lequel ayant mis en Iustice d'accusation capitale, ses Capitaines,pour auoir continué leur charge outre le temps qui leur auoit esté prescript et preordonné, absolut à toute peine Pelopidas, qui plioit sous le faix de telles obiections, et n'employoit à se garantir que requestes et supplications .   ||| Witnesse the Thebanes , who having acensed and indited their Captaines , as of a capitall crime, forsomuch as they had continued their charge beyond the time prescribed them, absolved and quit : Pelopidas of all punishment , because he submissively yeelded under the burden of such objections , and to save himselfe , imployed no other meanes , but suing-requests , and demisse intreaties .
et au contraire Epaminondas, qui vint à raconter magnifiquement les choses par luy faites, et à les reprocher au peuple d'vne façon fiere et arrogante, il n'eut pas le cœur de prendre seulement les balotes en main, et se departit .   ||| where on the contrary , Epaminondas boldly relating the exploits atchieved by him , and with a fierce and arrogant manner upbraiding the people with them, had not the heart so much as to take their lots into his hands , but went his way , and was freely absolved .
l'assemblee louant grandement la hautesse du courage de ce personnage .   ||| the assembly much commending the stoutnesse of his courage .
Dionysius le vieil , apres des longueurs et difficultés extremes , ayant prins la ville de Rege , et en icelle le Capitaine Phyton , grand homme de bien , qui l'auoit si obstinéement defendue , voulut en tirer vn tragique exemple de vengeance .    ||| Dionysius the elder , after long-Ungering and extreme difficulties , having taken the Citie of Beggio , and in it the Captaine Fhyton , a worthy honest man , who had so obstinately defended the same , would needs shew a tragicall example of revenge .
Il luy dict premierement , comment le iour auant , il auoit faict noyer son fils , et tous ceux de sa parenté .   ||| First , he told him , how the day before , he had caused his Sonne and all his kinsfolkes to be drowned .
A quoy Phyton respondit seulement , qu'ils en estoient d'vn iour plus heureux que luy .   ||| To whom Fhyton , stoutly out-staring him , answered nothing , but that they were more happy than himselfe by the space of one day .
Apres il le fit despouiller , et saisir à des Bourreaux , et le trainer par la ville , en le fouëttant tres ignominieusement et cruellement : et en outre le chargeant de felonnes parolles et contumelieuses .   ||| Afterward he caused him to be stripped , and by his executioners to be taken and dragged thorow the Citie most ignominiously , and cruelly whipping him , charging him besides with outragious and contumelious speeches .
Mais il eut le courage tousiours constant , sans se perdre .   ||| All which notwithstanding, as one no whit dismayed , he ever shewed a constant and resolute heart .
Et d'vn visage ferme , alloit au contraire ramenteuant à haute voix , l'honorable et glorieuse cause de sa mort , pour n'auoir voulu rendre son païs entre les mains d'vn tyran : le menaçant d'vne prochaine punition des dieux .   ||| and with a cheerefull and bold countenance went on still , loudly recounting the honourable and glorious cause of his death, which was , that he would never consent to yeeld his Countiy into the hands of a cruell tyrant , menacing him with an imminent punishment of the Gods .
Dionysius , lisant dans les yeux de la commune de son armee , qu'au lieu de s'animer des brauades de cet ennemy vaincu , au mespris de leur chef , et de son triomphe , elle alloit s'amollissant par l'estonnement d'vne si rare vertu , et marchandoit de se mutiner , et mesmes d'arracher Phyton d'entre les mains de ses sergens , feit cesser ce martyre : et à cachettes l'enuoya noyer en la mer .   ||| Dionysius plainly reading in his Souldiers lookes , that in lieu of animating them with oraving his conquered enemie , they in contempt of him , and scome of his triumph , seemed by the astonishment of so rare a vertue , to be moved with compassion , and inclined to mutinie , yea , and to free Fhyton from out the hands of his Sergeants or Guard , caused his torture to cease , and secretly sent him to be drowned in the sea .
Certes c'est vn subiect merueilleusement vain, diuers, et ondoyant, que l'homme: il est malaisé d'y fonder iugement constant et vniforme .   ||| Surely , man is a wonderfull , vaine , divers , and wavering subject : it is very bard to ground any directly-constant and uniforme judgement upon him .
Voyla Pompeius qui pardonna à toute la ville des Mamertins , contre laquelle il estoit fort animé , en consideration de la vertu et magnanimité du citoyen Zenon , qui se chargeoit seul de la faute publique , et ne requeroit autre grace que d'en porter seul la peine .   ||| Behold Pompey , who freely pardoned all the Citie of like end the Mamertines , against which he was grievously enraged , for the love of the magnanimitie , and consideration of the exceeding vertue of Zeno , one of their fellow-citizens , who tooke the publike fault wholly upon himselfe , and desired no other favour , but alone to beare the punishment thereof .
Et l'hoste de Sylla , ayant vsé en la ville de Peruse de semblable vertu , n'y gaigna rien , ny pour soy, ny pour les autres .   ||| whereas Syllaes host having used the like vertue in the Citie of Perugia, obtained nothing, neither for himselfe, nor for others .
